Yes. Good morning.
Yeah, good morning. Now we've got-
Kia ora
... 10 minutes with you.
What's that?
Okay, so we start, right?
Yes, please.
Okay. So, kia ora, everybody. My name is Cosmo Jeffrey.
I'm currently the president of the Canterbury Howard League for Penal Reform,
and with me today is Buster Thompson, our secretary.
As we stated in our written submission, the Howard League has been advocating for
penal reform for over 100 years.
While we primarily engage in advocating for reform related to
prisons, we also pride ourselves on
promoting an evidence-based consideration of all
proposed legislation that relates to justice and civil
liberty.
We are aware that there are other organizations who provided much more
detailed submissions on this topic,
and the Howard League would like to support those organizations in submitting
that we oppose the needless expansion of police powers.
We believe we should be strengthening privacy laws rather than
weakening them.
More especially when it was revealed that over 50% of those
images taken by the police were of persons
of Maori and Pasifika descent.
As an organization, the Howard League is confronted daily
by the inherent discrimination that is rife within our justice system.
Polynesian and Maori people are totally
over-represented in all the cohorts we
advocate for the New Zealand justice system, and the police
are no exception.
More Maori and Pasifika people are stopped, apprehended,
arrested, tried in our courts, and imprisoned by a
factor of at least three times compared to Pakeha
subjects.
Considering the disproportionate
impact this will have on Maori, we think that more effort is
required to work with Maori and Maori organizations
in developing legislation related to the collection and
storage of information.
Consequently, the Howard League urges the Justice Committee to
take a breath and consider fully the
implications of this legislation.
In preparing our submission,
we've basically decided that it's easy to criticize.
Anyone can criticize, but what we want to do is try and
provide some answers. So we researched what other European
jurisdictions do in basically
managing public surveillance and storage of collected
data,
and what we found was really interesting.
Most of the countries in the European Union have signed up, in fact,
all of them, as far as we can work out, have signed up to the
GDPR.
Hmm. I didn't know what this was either, but it's the General Data
Protection Regulation. So they all sign up to the General Data
Protection Regulation, and this sets strict
regulations which control the surveillance and
storage of people in public places.
For example, there's a proportionality requirement.
Police cannot indiscriminately photograph the entire
population.
The collection of biometric data is prohibited in
principle, but if permitted,
if it's strictly necessary, it must be
proportionate for investigating specific crimes
or maintaining security.
The storage and retainment. The EU allows the
retention of biometric data of suspects and convicts,
but national laws must set appropriate time
limits for the reviewing and the need to store that
data.
For example, in most European countries, if any of the people
whose images are taken and stored do not offend in the next 12
months, that data is deleted, and that's what we believe
should happen in New Zealand.
We could outline this in much greater detail, but to be
truthful,
the parliamentary committee, the Justice Committee, and you
guys generally, have much more efficient and
capable research people who can find this information.
We don't need to reinvent the wheel.
There are
basically instructions and institutions
in place that deal with this sort of thing.
Why should we be starting out from scratch and having
a carte blanche
system where people can be willingly
recorded and data stored infinitely?
We believe that a body such as the Privacy Commissioner should be
set up to oversee this legislation
and be responsible for the taking and
storage of images in the public.
If those people do not offend for the next 12 months, then that data
should be deleted. That makes sense.
There needs to be a clear purpose for why police are taking photos
of someone
rather than a vague possible future
purpose. Otherwise, effectively,
anyone's photo can be taken by the police indiscriminately and
stored forever. We believe this not to
be a fair and reasonable situation, and we want
it to be controlled.Um-
All right
... that's
our oral submission, and we could answer any questions
if there were any.
Hey, well, thank you very much. Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Uh, kia ora, and kia ora Cosmo and Buster.
Thanks for all the work that you do.
Look,
I guess,
most people would accept that if police are investigating a crime or,
uh, something they know is planned as a crime, that surveillance and
photographs is probably justifiable.
Do you have any comments on them taking photographs,
where they are really just gathering information about the
behaviors of people that they know are part of criminal
networks rather than investigating a particular crime or proposed crime?
Well, our view is that it goes, it should be for a particular
purpose, in that it should be to investigate a crime rather
than just... Otherwise, you get this risk of investigating people
who they consider associates but are not actually committing any
offenses. I think it goes too far to be investigating or
taking photos, this biometric information of people who are not actively
involved in a crime.
Thanks, Flip.
Um,
just personally, I don't know if this helps, but
it's no secret that I was, I have been in prison.
Uh, it was over 25 years ago. I was down in Twizel the other day, and
I got stopped by the police on my Ducati, and he asked
my license. Within seconds, he brought up my history,
started talking about something that happened 25 years ago,
and I was left standing there wondering, "Haven't I done the
time? Shouldn't I be allowed to get on with my life?"
And I'm just wary of collecting information on people
that can be called up within seconds and used against them
when it doesn't relate to the whole idea of taking
images of people.
All right. Hey, well, thank you for sharing that, particularly
your last personal comment, which was very interesting.
Um, and both of you this morning joining us on this submission, so
thanks for your time.
Right. Now, we're going to go to the New Zealand-
No other questions, I take it?
No. Um-
Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much, Cosmo.
Thank you.
Um, right. We're going to go to the Law Association of New Zealand.
Uh, and hopefully we've got a couple of people.
Jacob Perry, Perry's there, I see, and maybe Lloyd
Gallagher. If you're free, please join us.
Oh, do we have Lloyd?
Yeah. Uh, Lloyd is there, but he's on mute.
All right. Well, that's all right. I can, uh, I can speak on Lloyd's behalf.
All right.
Um, tena kouto-
Good to have you. Now we've got 10 minutes with you, so please leave a little bit
of time for questions. Thank you.
Thank you. Tena kouto. Good morning. Um, so yes, I'm Jacob Perry.
Uh, appearing with me is Mr. Lloyd Gallagher.
Um, we're appearing on behalf of the Law Association's Technology and
Law Committee. Um, and thank you for giving us the opportunity to appear this
morning. Um, I won't retread the written
submissions that we have filed, but this morning I just wanted to
touch on, uh, three points. Um, firstly,
uh, whether or not this bill, uh, as it is, directly responds to the
issue which it sets out to address.
Um, I want to make some comments on the scope and threshold provisions,
uh, in the bill, and then also, uh, some general comments
about the, uh, technological context in which this
is occurring.
Um, and I suppose at the outset, I just want to be clear
that, uh... or be clear that we acknowledge the underlying
legislative objective here. So the Supreme Court decision in
Tamifuna, uh, and before that, uh, the IPCA, uh,
Privacy Commissioner joint inquiry, uh, there is uncertainty
arising out of that, and there is a need for, uh, a clear
basis for information collection.
What we want to ensure is that in addressing this issue, we
don't
end up with, uh, either further uncertainty, uh,
or that, or finding that we address the issue in a way that,
uh, is
inconsistent with, um, individuals' reasonable expectations of
privacy. So,
um, the first point I wanted to make was just linking this
back to where we've come from, uh, with the Supreme
Court decision in Tamifuna. Uh, now that decision
didn't simply say police can't take photos in public.
Um, it turns on a lot more than that.
Um, there's the taking the image, identifying the person,
retaining the image for intelligence use without any, uh,
defined purpose, uh, and without any, uh, framework
behind it for retention or oversight, destruction, um,
et cetera.
Um, the Cabinet paper which preceded this
bill, um, specifically referenced the judgment of Justice
Koch in Tamifuna. Um, and
in that judgment, His Honor said, uh, that what was needed,
uh, was obviously, uh, uh, some sort of statutory authority for
this, but also, uh, a clear framework for retention, use,
and destruction. Uh, and there was a comment that the limits and the broad
framework for any such database should be determined by
Parliament, by amendment of the Policing Act.
So the bill that we have now, uh, inserts collection powers,
but it doesn't do those other things.
It doesn't give us a framework, um, after that
for retention and use and destruction.
And that's the really, really important part here, which I think
with the bill is a structural problem.
Um, the importance when it comes to privacy rights, the importance is the
use.
Um, I think initially, uh-In
relation to this bill, it was anticipated that we would account for
this
by including some sort of regulation-making power.
But that doesn't seem to have carried through to the bill itself,
and I'm not 100% sure why that is. But
that could have been one of the ways in which
this was addressed.
So that's point number one from our submissions, is that
some thought needs to go into what the framework after collection of
data looks like
and how that's going to be implemented.
So if there's authority to collect it, what restrictions are there going to be on
its further use?
The second point that I wanted to address, which I think is
set out in more detail in our written submissions, but just the threshold and
scope of collection powers that we're dealing with here
are broad. So,
we have
section 45A, which gives us our purposes, some specified
purposes, but also any other lawful purpose
connected with functions or activities of the police.
Now, when you pair that with the threshold in Section
45D,
because this purpose is open-ended, our concern is that it
leads to a risk of indiscriminate collection
without a clearly defined purpose, which is
the same concern that was being echoed in Tamifuna, and
before that, the joint inquiry.
45D, which I just referenced,
sets the threshold for intelligence collection.
And at the moment, it is
or it could be used in a vague way. So the threshold is
information will or may support police
functions or activities. So,
just on its face, that could support or, sorry, it could
permit collection on a purely speculative basis.
So, well, this might be useful in the future,
but I don't have any real reason to collect it right now.
So there's a threshold issue in our view.
And the third
point I wanted to make on the provisions was just about
continuous recording of sound and video solely for
intelligence purposes.
Now, in the bill, this is subject to a reasonableness test, but
I do note that in the cabinet paper,
that continuous recording for intelligence purposes was not intended
to be included.
And
it's unclear why the bill has, I suppose, taken a different
direction.
So our submission
well, on that at least, if there is going to be an authority for
continuous intelligence only recording, there needs to be a
framework around that. So
what sort of duration medium is
anticipated? Who can authorize this? Is this going to be reviewed?
How long can it be held? These sorts of things.
I realize I'm
whipping through my time here, but so the third point that I'll make is I think
more of a general one, which has to do with the
technological context in which all of this is occurring.
So, not just police technology, all technology in
New Zealand and globally at the moment, is
enabling a greater use of mass data,
and it's moving at quite a fast pace.
If we are introducing broad collection powers without
a framework that governs future use of data and
retention,
the practical effect is we're going to vastly expand the volume of
information being put into databases, and we may not
currently know,
or even anticipate the use that it's going to be put to.
There was a comment that came from the Supreme Court in Tamifuna that
advances in technology may transform the practical effect of
otherwise familiar police practices.
So intelligence notings are familiar, commonplace police
activity.
But the modern version of that which we seem to be looking at is
including
much larger, massive amounts of personal information
being pushed into police databases and the ability to use
and analyze it at scale, that
is not clear to us at present.
So that's the overall point,
being, I think,
how this data is going to be used. Actually, I could stop there. Yes.
We've got Dr Laurence Sunan, got a question for you.
Thanks, Chair. Kia ora, Jacob, can you hear me?
Yes.
Cool.
Just on the data front, I'm really interested to know also if you've done
any work around how that data can be shared with
agencies overseas. Are you familiar with Migrant
Fife?
I'm not.
So-
I don't know if Lloyd might
Yeah, I'll jump in on this one a little bit-
Yeah
... if that's all right
So just going from there, can you see potentially data like
this being used by other countries?
Yeah. Look, we've already seen some of the work that I'm doing with Curtin
University, and my PhD around AI and the risks of AI
as well, is we've already seen the risks of data being able to be
collated, and compared, and then fed between
an AI to another AI, and simply data breach
risks that are around that.
The amount of data that we're looking to collect here and the general
risk for public informationUm, that is required
under different Official Information Acts and all those sort of acts, uh, as well
as the confidentiality to require some of it to be withheld.
There is always a general risk of how that data's going to be shared and released
in long-term, uh, ventures, especially with the technology and how it's developing.
One of the other risks is with the collaboration that we're now doing with the
FBI, et cetera, internationally, we run a risk of that information
no longer being able to be within our control.
Uh, once it's in the US's hands, under the Patriot Act, et
cetera, there's a massive amount of risk of that data being put into
databases and miscommunicated along different areas.
We saw the new AI acts that are coming in that have sort of been floated around
America at the moment, where one agency is able to provide that
information to another agency. Microsoft is able to use it for other
purposes under the terms and conditions.
Um, it, it creates a minefield for potential risk and, uh,
inappropriate use of this information and, and that's why we think there, there
should be limits on it.
Right. Um, Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Thanks for that. Look, um, little less technical than Lawrence, but
look, I'm interested in whether you think in terms of legitimate collection of
information, there is a tenable
way to frame intelligence gathering rather than
investigation. Um, because it seems to be one of the things that we're
really struggling with. We all accept that gathering data for
investigations is one thing, but it's this loose kind of
concept of being able to go about and collect intelligence, which
seems to be hard to pin down.
Well, that's one of the risks that we've always had, is that the intelligence side
of things is always about the potential for misuse
of, uh, of behavior in the future. So the, we have a whole
security system and Securities Act around collecting that sort of
intelligence. Uh, then we're, we're talking about generally collecting
ordinary people's information and the general public.
They're not quite the s- and, and in my opinion, they're not quite the same thing
because what we do for intelligence, uh, collection
really has a, a lot of frameworks around that and a, and a bit more broader
approach. Whereas what we talked about in general public, when you're walking down
the street is more around the protection of an
individual where there is no potential crime, but may be
one in the future. So this, this comes back to the same sort of arguments we had
with DNA testing in the early years, where how long do you keep
DNA information? Is it for a potential, uh, rape or
abuse in the future? And where should the limits on that information
be? And, and rightly pointed out by some others, GDPR does put
some limitations on that, and I, and in my opinion, I think we should follow that
same sort of approach because it does create that better balance.
Um, Jacob, did you have anything to add to that?
No, no. I, I just think that, um,
e- even if, um, even if we're talking about general intelligence purposes,
um, I, I think we have to start, um, from
a place where we have a framework around h- you know, how, how long
or for what purposes it's going to be used, uh, data's going to be used for.
Um, uh, uh, and that's really the big problem with the bill at the
moment, uh, is that it's t- it's just,
it's left a big blank space in there.
And, and it is a tricky question. I, I acknowledge the que- uh, acknowledge the
question, but, um, the answer to that question isn't leaving the answer blank.
All right. Hey guys, we've gone over time, but, um, very good, uh,
submission and, um, drew out some points that we haven't heard before.
So thank you for both of you for coming on this morning.
You're very welcome. Thank you for having us.
Right. Now I'm going to-- Thank you.
We're going to Carolyn Young from the Retail New
Zealand. Hopefully Carolyn's, uh... Good morning.
You've turned up in per- person and we're not there with you this morning.
Hey, good. Hey, lovely to see you again.
Um, looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Thank you very much. Um, and just introduce my colleague.
I'm Denise Farland. I'm the advocacy manager for Retail NZ.
Look, thank you very much for, um, the time to chat this morning.
We, in principle, um, support the bill.
Um, what, there is a small exception, as has
been heard in the previous two submissions.
What we'd say in terms of retailers, that the majority of New
Zealanders would be walking through a retail store at least once a
week or once a fortnight across New Zealand.
Uh, we have a high degree of recidivist offending in
retail where, um, people are coming back again and again and again,
and we know that retail crime is a significant problem.
We wanna ensure that police have the right tools in order to, uh,
be able to capture offenders, and then obviously send them through the justice
system in a way in which they'll get charged and, uh, in a
way that will be meaningful.
But we do agree with the prior two submissions that,
um, you know, there needs to, we need to ensure that there's the right controls
that are sitting in place, uh, for, you know, the, the framework
of any collection of data. We sit here believing that the police do a really great
job and that they are collecting information for the right reasons.
Uh, we would start at a, um, not at the lowest common denominator space,
but starting to say that on the position that we believe they do the right work.
We need to give them the right tools, there needs to be the right framework, and
have the right protections, including, you know, they need to comply to privacy as
much as anybody else, and proportionality also needs to comply.
Um, you know, and we would think, uh, smarter people than us would be able to look
into what's o- overseas that we could learn from.
You know, they did talk about the general data protection regulation in Europe.
You know, maybe that's something that someone could look into, but, but as long as
we've got the right framework and protections to ensure that people are protected,
we believe that police need the tools to do the job.
Um, they would be the key things from our perspective.
And what about, uh, the expanding the road closures? You're happy with all that?
The road closures. Yes. The expansion of the road closure powers,
we think,
again, police need to be able to have the right tools in place to be able
to keep our communities safe from harm.
And whether that is in terms of being able to
give out fines and have the correct penalties in place to ensure that
police can close off roads when required and
stop people from going into those areas when it is
not a safe environment for them to be
in. We're generally supportive a- again
of that.
And I'll just add, just in a retail environment, we're seeing guns
presented at store these days. So it's not just machetes and
knives and other weapons, but we're seeing people turn up with guns.
And when those situations happen, we get quick response from police.
They need to be able to cordon off areas and make sure that no one else comes into
those public spaces because retail environments are a sort of a
pseudo-public space where you've generally got free entry into.
So having those controls to close off areas to ensure that our
communities are safe are really important.
All right, good. Right, members, questions.
Just in terms of your most retailers,
in terms of their storage, I see that you
support police being able to record in private premises
such as a retail store. So I presume that's what you mean by that.
What's the norm for retailers in terms of collecting
images, particularly video
images in a shop or whatever? Is there a norm around
that?
I would say 99% of retailers have CCTV, and
there's wide use of CCTV
across retail. Multiple
cameras throughout store. People should be checking those things.
And they're compliant to legislation around how long they
can hold onto that information for.
And police being able to come back into store, I for instance, happen to be able to
review tape is important. It's something like a 30 or 60 day, something
like that. I don't actually have that time
on the tip of my tongue, I'm sorry. But it is a much longer period of
time than, say, for example, facial recognition where,
if a retailer's using that, it's deleted within a minute of it being collected.
Okay. Right. Camilla Village.
Yeah, just a sorry, a follow-up supplementary to the chair's
question. I just wanted to know,
obviously I understand the vast
majority of retailers will be very compliant with providing the
CCTV footage. But in those instances where that isn't available
in the store or for some reason not made available,
this bill may allow
the
ongoing surveillance outside a retail store,
even if that is considered a private place, as that's visible publicly.
And obviously with retail stores, that might be more likely to be visible publicly
than in other private places. And so is
that something that you've consulted any of your members on in terms of your
support for that ongoing surveillance, or is it more of
the
provision of CCTV so you wouldn't imagine that would be
utilized in many instances?
There's probably two answers to that question.
The first piece I'll go with in terms of member feedback, look, we've had members
come to us and we had a
with
Privacy Commissioner and with the Police Commissioner and have asked them, can
we share or can police share their
watchlist or some of their people that they're most worried about with the
retailers' watch lists if they've got FRT so that we can make
sure we can keep our stores safe. So some retailers are really open about being
able to have police insert data into their space.
Obviously at the moment you can't do that.
But I would also expect as a second point would be that we would,
if police are wanting to put in place, I guess you'd call it
surveillance for want of a better word, we would expect that there would
be adequate reasoning that sits in behind that and
purpose for it. So we're not just surveilling the
whole country for anything, but there's actual
specific reasons to understand why someone would be coming to that
space on a regular basis and is undertaking something that would be
viewed to be illegal and will lead them to prosecution down the line.
So there would have to be something substantive to it.
All right. Hey, thank you Carolyn and Denise for your presentation.
Nice to see you again.
Nice to see you. Thanks.
Right. Now, we've got Anjum Rehman,
who I see you are there. As-salaam alaikum.
Good morning.
We've got five minutes with you.
Wa alaikum as-salaam. Tēnā koutou katoa.
Bismillahirrahmanirrahim.
I'm presenting not as an expert, but just as a member of the
public, and in my written submission I talked about the
oversurveillance of our communities, which was a
fact up to at least May 2018, per the
Royal Commission of Inquiry report on the Christchurch
mosque terrorist attacks.
And, in this instance, and for some of the powers in this
bill, what we're looking at is young Maori men who were the
target of oversurveillance.
And oversurveillance is part of over-securitization
and
is not the most effective way to reduce crime.
We saw after the Christchurch mosque attacks,
securitization of mosques with surveillance cameras and
various other measures in place. But I don't believe that is
what would make the mosques safer.
If anyone was so inclined, they'd just kill people as they came out onto the
street.Do we then securitize the whole of
society?
In the US, if we take that as an example, where they have
so much securitization of shops, glass fronts, you
can't interact with people directly.
The things that are happening in schools for their kids,
having to do drills and all these kinds of things, but it hasn't
really
resulted in
lower gun-related deaths. So what I'm saying is that
prevention efforts are much more effective and better worth our
resources, and I do want to acknowledge the support of the New Zealand
Police after the Christchurch mosque attacks, and that my submissions
are presented with the utmost respect for that
support.
And
on the same theme of over-surveillance and securitization, this bill
potentially removes the right to political protest, and the Law Commission have
laid out their concerns in this regard.
And if we look at what is happening overseas,
our concerns or my concerns are that this kind of thing could start to
happen here. So for example, in the UK, we're seeing the
criminalization of elderly
pacifists through the use of terrorism laws
in incidences where there's no lives were lost.
We've seen
overriding of basic protection. So for example,
some of those people that have been tried
around damaging
military assets,
the jury that has been making decisions are not allowed to know
that if they convict them or if they find them guilty, that they will be
sentenced under terrorism laws and not just laws related to
vandalism of property. This kind of overreach
is incredibly scary, and that's what slippery
slopes are about. When we look at what's happening across
the ditch in Australia and the banning in one of their states of the term
global intifada,
and we're not seeing the defenders of free speech coming out,
protecting against the criminalization of a term of protest
against theft of land, loss of life, access to health, education, and
more.
Within our context, yes, there's a particular religious group
that comes out to harass other religious communities and
other communities that protest,
who misuse the haka. They always target minority
groups and not the majority,
and I want to offer my solidarity to the Sikh community who were their
latest target.
The answer is not to change the law in a way that could stifle
political protest against state terrorism, against the killing of
tens of thousands of children, against illegal wars
when there was never an imminent threat.
And I could be talking about the illegal invasion of Iraq more than 20 years
ago or the illegal bombing of Iranian citizens and schoolgirls this
year.
Discrimination and other previous speakers have
talked about automated decision-making, AI
algorithms, machine learning.
And as AI is increasingly used in state agencies,
there is not enough scrutiny, and there is no
effective regulation of how that data is going to be used
and the ongoing effect.
But I had more to say, but I think other speakers have covered that
much better than I could.
And so the powers in this bill are going to make that worse.
And in this space and around AI and platform
regulation, there is a lack of effective regulation
overall as it is, and what protections there are, are now starting
to be dismantled, and we see that with the BSA being taken
away. But even if there was no discrimination, the
collection and holding of data by the state in this manner with so little
safeguard is an overreach. And
investing in adequate food, secure housing,
and warm housing, education, health, social cohesion,
all of that would solve these problems so much more
effectively than what is proposed in this bill. Thank you.
All right. Hey, thank you for your submission.
We're well over time, but I didn't want to interrupt you,
because I thought what you had to say was very important.
But unfortunately, we'll have to move on.
But thank you for coming on this morning and
making your thoughts known to the committee.
Right. Now, we're going to Professor
Gunesekara. I think I saw you are
on.
If you'd like to join us, that would be fantastic.
We've got
10 minutes with you.
Professor, are you available? I think you've got your mute on.
There we are. Good morning, Professor.
Yes, good morning,
Mr. Chair. Thank you for the opportunity to
present on this in a personal capacity.
I just want to clarify that
my role, I'm an academic at the University of Auckland.
I have for decades been researching and teaching and publishing in
privacy law.
But I'm also a past chair and currently the co-convener
of the Privacy Foundation's
surveillance... Sorry, I'll just start my video. I just realized.
Apologies for that.
Yes, so,
I'm the co-convener of the Privacy
Foundation's surveillance working group.
However, I'm not speaking to you this morning in that role.
I think the foundation is making a submission on its own account, so I'm
speaking purely as a privacy observer
and a commentator and academic.
And for the record, I completely support the Privacy
Foundation's position. We have completely opposed the bill.
We've taken a, in principle, view that we oppose the bill, and that is
also my position.
However, I want to address, and I oppose both Part 1 and Part 2, but I
want to speak specifically to some specifics of Part
1 on the basis that, if it does go ahead, then I would like
to see some specific safeguards. And these relate to
things like clarifying the relationship.
They're largely of a technical nature, clarifying the relationship
between the bill, the amendment bill, and the Privacy Act, and the
Biometric Processing Privacy Code.
But I want to start
this morning by dispelling the notion there's a public,
that people might have the idea that somehow if the police take
pictures in public places, and even on private property,
it's the same as you or me taking a photo of
members of the public. There's a huge difference between you or
I taking a photo,
and the police, because the police then retain that
picture, that photo, that image, goes into a database, and
it can be used in a way,
perhaps months or years later, that has serious
effects on the freedom of that individual concerned.
Whereas if you and I take a photo of somebody, we don't have the power to later on
go and arrest them or detain them or prevent them getting a job if
there's a police vetting inquiry.
So these are the kinds of distinctions that I think need to be made.
There's also the concern of what I see as mission creep, and I think some of your
previous speakers have hinted at this.
I have also heard rumors about the Migration Five, and I'm
currently working, in fact, I have written a piece on this, happy to make that
available to the committee,
on the proposal by the current consultation with the
border protection authorities, with Homeland Security in the United States,
where to get our visa waiver status, the United States is
insisting on direct access to other countries' law
enforcement databases. And that is, to me, very concerning.
I see there's a question
from-
No, you finish, please, Professor
Yeah. So,
that is
a concern. And we have examples previously of
American companies like Clearview.
Once they get access to these images, they go in public databases,
and it's very difficult to then get them
deleted. I want to speak very quickly about the difference
between biometric information, which this bill authorizes, and other forms
of biographical information. There is a big difference.
In the age of AI and in the age of facial recognition,
images are very different from a police constable taking a note
in his or her notebook.
Images can identify people instantly, be matched,
be stored in databases, and
have a much more significant potential. Your face is your face.
You cannot really get a new face if somebody hacks into it.
And there's no guarantee for the police, or anybody for that matter, that
these images won't end up, for example, on the dark web
or eventually, if there's a hack or something like that.
But I want to also talk about the
overwide definitions such as
policing intelligence, intelligence or other lawful purposes,
integrity of policing.
These purposes are currently defined very broadly in Section 9 of the act,
and they are so broad as to potentially include any of these kinds
of use that the police find for the information.
So that's the mission creep that I'm talking about.
And
when you talk about community support, which is one of the listed
purposes in Section 9, it could be counterproductive because if you're
surveilling-As target population to try and intimidate
them, for example, rangatahi or something like that, you might think,
well, we can intimidate people by taking photographs of them, deterring them from
committing crime. That could actually be counterproductive because
community support really means taking the community with you, not
necessarily making them the objects of surveillance. So that was an issue.
The other issue I wanted to raise is to dispel the notion that somehow all we're
doing is restoring the status quo.
I've listed these points in my submission.
There are sections of the Policing Act at the moment, sections 32,
33, and 34
of the Principal Act, which allow the police to
retain images and other biographical data.
And there are various conditions on that, that that
information is for current proceedings or when someone
is detained. But there's an obligation where the proceeding doesn't
carry on for the images to be deleted.
So that
is the status quo. And this bill changes that status quo by
now allowing those images to be retained, potentially
indefinitely, as I think one of your previous speakers also mentioned.
There is the issue identified by the Independent Police Complaints Authority and
the OPC joint investigation about
access and correction to those records, and the police previously have
struggled to actually-- I know they have made some improvements, and I have a
great deal of respect for the police.
They have been trying hard to improve their data
collection and storage practices.
But
we know that there's a possibility that these images could be
dispersed, and it might be difficult to retrieve them.
And once things go in the National Intelligence database, I've given an example of
cases where, decades later, it comes back to haunt
a respectable member of the community when there's a police vetting
request and somehow their image or their information pops up.
So the clarity is needed as to whether the Privacy Act and the Biometric Processing
Code continues to apply. I think they should.
We have no right of deletion in New Zealand, and that is a great concern to me as a
privacy academic. I think our law needs to have
retention limits, and that's something that's currently not in the law.
I also want to address section 45C, clause, or rather
clause 45C of the bill, which allows police to
take images on private property. They need to
comply with a reasonableness test, but that's not very
clear as to how that compares with the more nuanced
balancing that's required, for example, in the Biometric
Privacy Processing Code, which does require
privacy risks to be
balanced with the benefits in a more nuanced kind of manner,
a more finely grained kind of way of doing that.
The reasonableness test is just too blunt.
And in conclusion, I also think if this bill goes ahead, there needs to be
some provision for not only very clear
statements that the Privacy Act needs to continue to apply,
but also the need for subsequent powers of audit for the Privacy
Commissioner or the
Independent Police Complaints Authority to be able to audit how
these new collection powers are being used, and that they're not being
used in an over-broad way. That's pretty much all I had to say.
I'm happy to take questions at this time.
Okay. We've got one. Oh, I think we had one from Rima Nakli.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, sir. I want to ask, one of your earlier references was
about the huge difference between police taking
pictures and members of the public
taking pictures. And
with respect to this
huge difference,
am I to understand that you would also like to see
maybe in the future some changes with respect to laws and how
members of the public can take pictures?
Seeing that you have studied this and you're an expert in this field,
would you make-
That's a very-- Yeah. Sorry. Yeah, that's an excellent question.
It's an excellent question. And it's probably beyond the brief of the current
inquiry, I guess. But
if I could just answer that briefly, I think that the Office of the Privacy
Commissioner does have very detailed guidance to members of the
public as to their taking of pictures.
So I think in the first instance, members of the public who want to take pictures
in public, generally, our law is pretty relaxed in that respect in New Zealand.
And there are broad exceptions, for
example, for individuals in the Privacy Act, where they're doing it for their
personal or family needs.
But if they're doing it in a business context or even a hobby perhaps,
then apart from the polite convention that you always get the permission of the
person you're taking a photo of,
there are requirements in the Privacy Act, because pictures are personal
information that's covered by the act. So that's my brief reply.
I think there's already plenty of guidance around that.
I'm not sure that we need separate legislation on it.
I think that the law currently does allow picture taking.
And also addressing some of the points made by earlier
speakers today, if members of the retail
community who are worried by
a threat posed by a particular person, they are entitled to take
photos,
and then to transmit them to the police.
The Privacy Act does have pretty broad exceptions where they have a
reasonable basis for believing it's necessary
for follow-up to give that information to law enforcement authority.
But the test is there has to be a reasonable basis.
You can't just take pictures of everyone-
Right
... and treat everyone as a suspect, unless you have some reasonable basis
for it.
So Professor, we're running out of time, but I've got two questions.
Go ahead.
In your section nine, you listed the six thresholds
or areas where you can do surveillance.
One is community support and
reassurance.
Mm-hmm.
I wonder if you could give me on what you understand that to mean, and the second
one is your ability to check your file and
if there is something on there that's clearly incorrect or
whatever, you can ask for its deletion.
What is the international practice around that?
So hopefully, sorry, I'm running out of time, but keen to hear
your views on those.
Well, the second question is probably more tricky, but the first, community
support is pretty broadly defined as is proper, I guess.
And that's what the police think, but the police does an excellent job of most all
of the time, pretty much. And that's policing by consent, which
is
the ideal situation where the community is happy with what the police are doing and
do everything in their power to support the police.
But on the other hand, it can backfire if you, as I've said, this
is the whole Minority Report situation.
If you think someone is more likely to commit a crime and you watch them more of
the time, it can actually be a self-fulfilling prophecy because,
apart from the fact the data you're gathering is going to make the
result rigged in the sense that those people, whether they commit more
offenses or not, they're more likely to be caught if they do.
So there is a fairness aspect, and we know that there has been that in the
Independent Police Complaints Authority investigation earlier about
Rangatahi and the perception that some groups, Maori and
others, were victimized. In terms of your
second point, I think was what are the
correction rights in New Zealand?
They're relatively weak because the Privacy Act does, and the
Biometric Code, which basically mirrors the Privacy Act,
says that people, individuals, have the right to ask for correction, but
they don't have a right to require correction or require deletion, or deletion
is not one of the rights that's specifically required under New
Zealand law at the moment. Now, there are extreme circumstances where
sometimes the only appropriate correction is to delete it,
and there have been occasional cases in the Human Rights Review Tribunal where that
has been ordered. But they're rare, and generally, as in the case
that I give in my written submission, I think it's EFG, I can't remember the name
of the case. It's in the submission.
You'll see that in that case, the police
had, in that case, made a mistake. They had released information that was well out
of date. It was no longer relevant. It was therefore misleading.
It blighted a very successful career of a person who was a counselor.
But at the same time, when his lawyers asked for the
police to delete that information from the National Intelligence, the
Human Rights Tribunal was not
prepared to do that. They said, "No, we can't second-guess the police reason for
retaining that information, but we think they should be very careful before
releasing it." So these are where the tensions, I think, will come.
If you retain all of this information, down the track, it could
cause issues to individuals, and how are you going to make sure that
it's very carefully managed? And those are the
kinds of concerns I have.
All right. Hey, thank you, Professor.
We're slightly out of time, but I very much appreciate your
detailed submission on this area.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you for that.
Right. Now we're going to Pipitea Chambers, Julia Spellman.
Julia, are you with us? There you are. Thank you.
Now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Tena koutou katoa. My name's actually Elizabeth Hall from Pipitea Chambers.
Oh, sorry.
No, that's all right.
I apologize.
Julia Spellman from Te Hungaroa will be-
Oh, sorry
...
replaced by someone else. That's no problem at all.
I'm Elizabeth Hall. I'm the founder and co-chair of Te Mate Kahi, the
Defense Lawyers Association, and I bring to this select committee
discussion 30 years of personal experience and the wealth of experience of
my committee and also organization, where
we have spent our lifetimes working on
watching decision-making that police make, watching the surveillance
and the monitoring that they engage in, and the searches that they conduct.
And so I come to speak in opposition to this bill, not just as a criminal
defense lawyer, but also as a general lawyer and a citizen
of New Zealand. Because for the last 10 years, I have been
hoping that one day I would be sitting in this seat talking to a select committee
about the need for police to wear body cameras to record their
conduct for transparency, accountability, and to support the rule
of law and the effective operation of a safe and
fair criminal justice system. And yet I find myself
today sitting here arguing about how far the
state should be allowed to go in collecting information
about ordinary New Zealanders who have done nothing, who are not
suspected of committing a crime,
but where the police would be able to collect images, sound, and other personal
information
in the hope that they may at some point serve a policing
function in the future without any definition.
This bill represents a significant expansion of police power,
particularly around intelligence gathering and public area enforcement.
These changes are being advanced without consultation, effectively,
without safeguards, and importantly, without justification.
It matters because legislation of this kind doesn't
just affect people that you might think have committed a crime.
It affects every New Zealander who walks through every public
space, attends a protest, gathers with friends, or
interacts on a daily, everyday basis.The
bill ostensibly was introduced in response to the Supreme Court
decision in Tamifuna and Queen,
the King, sorry. In that case, the court found that the police had acted
unlawfully when photographing a member of the public during a routine
traffic stop and retained the image without lawful investigation
basis.
Our Supreme Court was clear. Even in public
spaces, New Zealanders retain reasonable
expectations of privacy. The state cannot
collect and permanently retain personal information
arbitrarily just because the technology exists.
And rather than responding to a judgment,
which I know our Minister of Justice has made clear, that if there's any
legislative
discussion by our Supreme Court that he doesn't like, he'll simply change the
law.
This bill goes much further. It seeks to not
only legalize conduct that our Supreme Court has said
would be wrong, but it substantially expands
police authority to retain and collect personal information, and it's an
extraordinarily broad power. It shifts us away from
targeted policing based on suspicion or
investigation towards speculative information gathering,
collecting information today about citizens in case it
might be useful tomorrow, and that should concern us
all.
Because once information enters a state intelligence system,
experience tells us that it is impossible to control what
happens to it, how long it's kept, how widely it's shared, and what
purpose it's put to.
What this bill does is remove the existing requirement under our
privacy law that information gathering needs to be necessary for a
lawful purpose.
The change is subtle in wording but enormous in
consequence. It means the threshold for collecting information
is now so low as to be non-existent.
This is not a bill to assist targeted
policing. This is a bill to introduce routine
surveillance of New Zealanders.
The privacy commissioner has warned that these powers could have
a chilling effect on civil rights and freedoms.
That warning deserves serious attention.
When people believe they may be photographed, monitored, and permanently recorded
by the state without suspicion of wrongdoing, behavior
changes. That's not hypothetical.
People become less willing to engage in protest,
in democracy, less willing to associate freely.
And history tells us that when broad surveillance
powers are expanded, they continue to expand in
practice over time.
One of the key concerns that you have heard time and time again before the
select committee in this government's term is the rushing of
legislation that dramatically changes the fabric of our
society without time for consultation or due
regard for consultation from experts working in this field.
Key agencies on this bill have also expressed grave
concern about the limited evidence of the reason or justification
for this intervention in New Zealanders' lives, constrained
policy analysis, flawed application of the New Zealand Bill of Rights,
and total
abject insufficient consultation with Māori and affected
communities.
This is not about questioning the intentions of the police,
but it would be wrong for us to not sit in this room and
acknowledge that we are still experiencing a
fallout of senior police officers demonstrating a
gross misjudgment of decision-making.
It is not that long ago, 2018, when the independent
police commissioner
released a report about police using the Land Transport
Act powers to stop and retain information
about people, citizens, attending a private
meeting.
What that demonstrates to us is that where legislation
is without detail, where legislation doesn't build in
safeguards and necessary constraint, left to their own
devices, the New Zealand police, on occasion,
make errors of judgment that affect New Zealand citizens.
So a good law is not built on trust and good intentions.
It's built on clear limits, accountability,
transparency, and democratic legitimacy.
This bill fails on every demand that we would have
of it.
Transparency is essential when the state is granted extraordinary
power. This debate is not about whether the police should be
able to investigate crime. Of course, they should.
The public expects and demands the police keep communities safe
and have effective tools to do so.
But effective policing and civil liberties are not opposing values.
They depend on each other.
Public trust is one of the most important tools policing has.
This trust is strengthened when powers are necessary,
proportionate, transparent, and subject to meaningful
oversight.
Te Matakāhi, the Defense Lawyers' Association, and the lawyers appearing before you
are not saying do nothing. We are saying slow down,
consult properly, define powers clearly,
and ensure that laws that are made reflect modern democratic
expectations of privacy and accountability.
We are not being obstructive. We are being
responsible. We do not want laws that
dramatically change the fabric of our society
because of a knee-jerk rebellion to a Supreme
Court judgmentOnce powers of surveillance and
control are normalized, they will not be rolled back.
So the decisions that the select committee make, and the parliament make,
will define the relationship between the state
and the citizens of New Zealand for years to come.
And what we say is that that relationship should be
grounded in rights, trust, and democratic principle.
Nga mihi nui kia koutou.
Right. Thank you, Elizabeth, for that.
I've got one question from Camilla Village.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much for your powerful submission, and for
putting the submission together with your colleagues.
I just had a question around the steps that we could take, and
thank you for your summation, which said that we should be more considerate
and go slower. We've heard from the Law Association,
and the Tamifuna judgment that there needed to be a change to the
law, and we will hear from the privacy commissioner later today
around the extent that they consider that
changes will be necessary. What do you think would be an
appropriate response to that judgment, given your
opposition to what's proposed in the bill?
Well, I think that the risk of removing the necessity principle is very
dangerous. The bill currently widens the scope of
collection to remove any necessary linkage of the lawful purpose
and the collection of the data. And that would be the first
starting point for at least some accountability on the
police to have to have a need for the collecting of
information. What I'm concerned about is,
and again, it might just be a lawyer thing, but we often say the devil is in the
detail, and this bill is devoid
of detail. It's essentially kicking for touch down the road
how this bill would, if made law, effectively be
rolled out. And my concern, and the concern of many
lawyers that have had the advantage and the time to review
this bill, is that when those decisions are being made,
they will not be made with the principles of privacy and the
interests of the overall
society and justice of New Zealand being brought in.
So I think that, in short, it's a tricky one because
obviously my position is that this should just be scrapped back to the drawing
board and a proper period of consultation.
There is no urgency with this legislation.
That it's not responding to an immediate need to change
the current status quo and what the Supreme Court has said.
And to engage these powers with essentially urgency and
lacking consultation, and lacking proper drafting and consultation around the
drafting, that's going to lead to error, and it's going to be difficult to
unwind that error going forward. And so I do say
pause, go back to the drafting, making sure that there's at least a
link between the necessity,
and working out more steps for accountability,
record-keeping,
and decision-making, because currently the bill is devoid.
All right. Hey, thank you, Elizabeth. We're way over time.
Rima, we might just put you on hold until the next one.
But thank you for your time-
Thank you
... for joining, Elizabeth.
Yep. Sure.
Great. Now,
I think we're going to Julia, but I see Dr.
Alex Greaves is there in our next submission,
so right. Cool. Thank you very much.
Are you on your own?
Yes, I am. Yep.
Cool. Okay. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Tena tatou.
Yes, thank you for the opportunity to present to the select
committee on this bill.
Yeah, unfortunately Julia wasn't able to make it, so my name's Alex Greaves.
I'm standing in for her-
That's all right
... today.
Yeah.
Presenting Hunga Roa's
submission on the bill.
Obviously you've heard from some other
speakers already this morning,
and our submissions
take a similar line, particularly to what Elizabeth has
just spoken to you about just previous to this.
A particular area that there is concern is
that this has been flagged as responding
to the Supreme Court decision.
As you've already heard,
our view is that it is an expansion to the status quo,
rather than responding simply to the decision.
And it does represent a concerning trend
of receiving a decision which
isn't liked or isn't agreed with,
and legislating over the top of that, which does
present some concerns around
the court and its function, and its ability to carry out its
function
being a fundamental part of the way that
our legal system works.
The other
major concern we have with this,
in and amongst the limited ability for
consultation and limited engagement on it is
recognizing Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
And the simple fact that
Maori are severely overrepresented
in much of the system, whether that's in the investigative
stage, whether that's in the criminal proceeding stage, and
going forward.
So we do have some very real concerns
over-Broadening the
police powers in such an extent as what this bill
does,
and the effect and disproportionate effect that that would have
on Maori and being
sometimes, or many times, a more vulnerable
part of our community.
It also presents issues, particularly in the private
space, where it opens up the ability to
do surveillance and particularly
in private spaces. If we look at other
areas where police have the ability to delve into
those spaces which might otherwise be private, there are
often checks and balances in place.
For a search warrant, they're required to apply and justify
reasons why they should be able to do just that.
In this bill, we don't see any of that.
It's simply the officer must satisfy themself, so it's a
circular
argument really. They have to satisfy themself that they've got the ability to
do it,
rather than satisfying an objective person,
an objective
assessment of what they
need to do
without having a particular need. It could be just in case.
So there's a concern there.
Without wanting to
repeat too much of
what you would've already heard and what's already in the submissions,
and I recognize, as you've indicated, Mr.
Chair, that
you are over time, so I'm happy to leave it there, and
open up for questions if there are any.
Right. Hey, thanks, Alex, I really appreciate that. Right.
Any questions from anyone?
All right. Alex, as you know, we've heard a lot of submissions, so
don't take it as a
reflection on your submission. It's a very good submission, but
it's been helpful to have that point readdressed again today.
So thank you for joining us this morning.
Thank you.
Right.
We are now going to
the New Zealand Outdoors and Freedom Party.
Hopefully, we've got Alison, is it?
Yes.
And I also thought... Right. Cool.
Thank you very much, Alison. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
I'm Alison Pavlowich from the Outdoors and Freedom
Party, and of course one of the objectives of the party is to
advocate for the protection of fundamental rights and
freedoms
for all New Zealanders. And so this bill has raised some interest,
and subsequently concern,
from members of the party.
So there's obviously two
powers that are being introduced by this bill.
Right at the beginning of the bill, the general policy statement says the bill
reaffirms the New Zealand Police's longstanding ability to
record images and sounds in public places, and to
collect personal information for lawful purposes, including
intelligence. I think, as
you've probably heard already from many submitters, it's not really a
reaffirmation, because the law is quite clearly
stated in Tamifuna, and
a lot of those principles are supported by the IPCA and Privacy
Commissioner report around
taking photos in particular.
And then it continues, the general policy statement at the beginning continues...
It's okay, I'm not going to read the whole thing.
It's just important, this little bit.
No, that's all right. We've got it here. We've all read your submission.
We've probably got it on our screens right now, reading it with you.
Yeah.
Exactly. Right at the beginning. The ability to collect and use information is
essential to the police's delivery of a broad range of policing
functions and services that support the vision for New Zealand to be the
safest country, where people can go about their daily life
without fear of harm or victimization.
And it's really those last reasons that I think are
the main reasons why the party
do not support the bill,
because of the fear of harm or victimization.
Okay, so just starting with the first power,
the new
power
to allow police to record and take
photos, and other forms of taking
images. So this explicitly runs
counter to the finding in the Tamifuna decision.
So I'm sure you're already aware, the majority of the Supreme Court found that
taking photos
without the context of a specific investigation
was an unreasonable search, and breached
the right that's granted to New Zealanders under
Section 21 of the Bill of Rights Act.
And I also want to note, and this was
mentioned by this
Gihan
Gunasekara, I think his name is.
Yes, that's right. The first name, yeah.
He talked about
the fact that this is different, that taking photos is different.
It's a next level
to just taking a phone number and
the name, because this is biometric data.
And in the Tamifuna case,
Justice Alan France specifically said that one of the
reasons for the decision that-The majority of the court
made was
that
this protection
as a development is part of the response necessary to
address the impact on Section 21 interests of
increasingly sophisticated technology.
So, she's recognized that taking photos
with increasingly sophisticated technology becomes more and more of
a
infringement on
New Zealanders' rights.
Of course, the IPCA Privacy Commissioner report
also
acknowledged that photographing members of the public
was not acceptable without,
unless specific crimes were being
investigated, and urged caution around those practices.
And this bill is very broadly stated and really overrides that
case, the Temi Funa case, and the concerns of the IPCA and the Privacy
Commissioner.
And certainly as a party, we are also concerned
about the impact on the rights and freedoms of New Zealanders to go about their
daily life free of threat or fear of being
photographed or filmed by the policing wing of the New Zealand Government,
and having one's details held on file on a system
without any reasonable justification.
And this really
completely runs contrary to
that initial
paragraph in the general policy statement.
It is because of the people wanting to go
about their daily life without fear of harm or victimization that this
first power shouldn't be introduced at all.
I won't go over it again, but Tim Cochran talked
about the Section 7 report, and I have
discussed it a little bit in the submission that we made.
There are some weaknesses in that report, especially with respect to that
first right. No proportionality testing has been
undertaken.
So I would urge the Select Committee to go back and look at that again and,
because Section 5 of the Bill of Rights Act does require that
where a specific piece of legislation is overriding
a right in the Bill of Rights Act, there needs to be
a
justification for that overriding, and that
needs to be done through a proportionality analysis.
That's well established in New Zealand law now.
Okay.
I'd also like to acknowledge Elizabeth's
submission.
To reiterate and say that I agree with the things that she said.
She talked about speculative information gathering, and that's what
this new right does. It definitely
extends the power significantly into what I would
consider quite a dangerous
territory.
As long as I've got time, I'll just deal briefly with-
I think we're just about there, so you better-
Okay. Briefly with-
I see you've got one more thing about the traffic, yeah?
Yeah. Just with the respect to the second power, the power to
close off areas.
It's clearly written that in the context in terms of the introduction
with a lens or its framed toward boy races
or some sort of road
traffic offenses, but it could clearly be
utilized a lot more broadly than that.
And certainly, our concern is the right to protest.
So important. I wouldn't be sitting here having this conversation if it
wasn't for protesters in the past
protesting for all sorts of rights that now we regard as normal
every single day.
I think that if this is just a road policing issue,
then the
legislation needs to be drafted more narrowly to
ensure that's understood. At the moment, it could be used far more
broadly than that, so it is also
a concern to the party. I'll leave it at
that.
All right.
We're not-
Thank you, Alison, for going through your two pages and very
detailed.
We're out of time, unfortunately, but thank you for it, and I'm sure that
you'll feel better for making those statements.
But a number of those arguments you've heard it before as you've heard.
Yes.
All right. Hey, thank you very much.
Right. Now, we've got Hannah, I think, on the
Zoom ready to join us. Hey, good morning, or afternoon now. It's early afternoon.
Good afternoon.
You're from Free Speech Union, is that correct?
That's correct, yes.
Cool. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Fantastic. Thank you. Thanks very much. My name is Hannah Clow.
I am in-house counsel for the Free Speech Union.
The Free Speech Union opposes this bill.
Our submission, as you'll see, is fairly detailed on this, and I will
attempt to summarize our key points briefly for you today.
First, Part 1's explanatory note, in our view, is misleading as it
characterizes the current situation.
It mischaracterizes it. It says that the police have a longstanding ability
to record images and sounds in public places, and this new legislation
is simply reaffirming that and clarifying that.
But the Independent Police Conduct Authority disagrees.
In its joint inquiry with the Privacy Commissioner in 2022, it said
there are restrictions on this. The Supreme Court came to a similar
conclusion last year.
So what authority is this bill relying on here?
What longstanding ability are we talking about?
Officers have only had smartphones with cameras and recordingFeatures
since 2013, as the IPCA pointed out, the use of
technology has changed drastically over the last 10 or
so years.
Now, the joint inquiry and the Supreme Court clarified restrictions on the police's
ability to take photos and record people to protect civil
rights,
such as the requirement for a link to an actual law enforcement
purpose or in relation to the investigation of a crime.
This
bill bulldozes over this and allows the police to record,
collect, and retain any information about a person, place, or
sound in a public place for an undefined intelligence purpose.
This will have a chilling effect on freedom of expression.
People will assume they're being watched at protests, rallies, and other public
events, so they won't attend in fear that they'll be identified, recorded, and
profiled later on.
With respect to part two, we see massive implications
for protesting in New Zealand. The bill proposes to expand
police powers to temporarily close a road for them to be able to
close any accessible area if they believe there is or
may be public disorder. That can be applied
to almost any protest in a public place.
Not only that, but police would have the power to shut down any public space
that may provide access to a private space,
so private events on private property.
That would only empower what we call Thugs' Veto.
So protest an event, and you can actually force the police to shut
down the area around an event, preventing people from entering.
What's particularly egregious about part two is its direct
contradiction to the IPCA's thematic review on
policing public protests in New Zealand, released last year.
What is the point of these entities, such as the IPCA,
if they're just going to be ignored?
Their findings should at least be engaged with, and if they
are rejected, a clear justification as to why.
The Attorney General's report, I will also note, is meant to flag
inconsistencies with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act, but it's wholly inadequate
here.
The only reference to freedom of expression
is in relation to potential compelled speech when providing biographical details.
There is no mention of the effect of the
substantial expansion of police powers on freedom of expression
and protest.
So what we have here, just to round this up, is a bill that
mischaracterizes the current legal situation, rejects the protections for
civil liberties that independent bodies such as the Supreme Court and the
IPCA have clarified and confirmed without clear
reason as to why,
and has not been properly scrutinized by the protections for civil
liberties under the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act, so it should not proceed.
If the committee has any questions, I'm happy to-
Right. Thanks, Hannah
... answer.
Very good. Right. Members, questions for Hannah?
No questions, but
a good submission. It's not usual for me to say that to
the Free Speech Union, but thanks for speaking out on that stuff.
Thank you.
Yeah, cool.
Appreciate that. Thank you very much.
Yeah. I think everyone, it's a very lengthy submission. We've all seen it.
So thank you, Hannah, for coming on and then talking us through that.
Thank you very much.
Right. Now, we've got
Sew Wing Ong.
Is it Mr. Ong? Yeah.
Yeah.
I saw you arrive earlier.
And we've got five minutes with you, Mr. Ong.
So looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Okay.
New Zealand, I'm sure, prides itself as a liberal democracy,
and the thing that separates a liberal democracy from a
more authoritarian regime,
of which there's a spectrum, is that there's safeguards
against
governmental power.
And the problem with this bill, as I read it, and I read it
as a lay person, I've got no degree in law whatsoever.
I don't
practice in law. I'm a data analyst,
actually. Is that
there's practically no safeguards.
The bill seems to allow the police, individual police,
shall I say, and I'll come back to that, individual police person
to decide whether they want to take a photo
or whatever other biometric information.
And the wording that's used to sort of justify that
is so wide that you could sort of, dare I say, drive a truck through it.
And that's where I have my problem.
It's not the actual act of it, it's just
the widespread nature and there's no accountability.
And
what I fear most is that
the individual policeman could sort of say, "Well, it was by gut feeling.
I thought that person was loitering." Or, "I thought this person
didn't look right," or, "They drove an expensive car,
and they didn't look like they should have the money to
drive an expensive car." And that happens a lot in
the United States,
where
people of colored origins driving fast car, driving expensive
cars tend to get stopped. And the worry is that this thing will
entrench unconscious bias amongst police
personnel. Now, it's an unconscious bias, so it's not
necessarily that you think, "Oh, I dislike all Maori," or
anything like that, but it just grows.
And-It's part of an institution as well, and
an institution has its own biases.
And that's where my problem with this bill is.
And the problem is that it's so loose, the wording
is so loose that, as I say, you could drive a truck through it.
Now, you wouldn't
do any other facet of government and sort of say, "Well, if you felt
like it, you could do it."
We don't say, "If you felt like wearing a seatbelt,
it's up to you. You
can choose to wear a seatbelt or not, it's up to you." No, we sort of say,
"Everyone has to wear a seatbelt." And similarly, you don't have
a choice as to whether you pay tax or not.
Everyone has to pay tax, and there's no discrimination there.
Whether you're rich, poor, Chinese
or whatever race or whatever sexual orientation, you have to
pay tax.
And that's the safeguard there, is that you can codify in law,
and that's fine. But when you leave it open and sort of just say whatever
justification you can come up with, that's where your
unconscious bias comes into it. And that's really my sole point.
I'm happy to take any questions you have.
Well, I'm glad you said you weren't a lawyer, because it's good to hear from
non-lawyers occasionally.
Now,
have we got any questions, members?
Okay. So,
I hear your strong point, which is
you've really got issues with part one of the bill,
and being clear about what the purpose of that is.
So, thank you for that. Very useful to hearing
from a citizen just on that perspective.
So, thank you for joining us this morning.
Thank you very much.
Right. Good. Right. Now, we have got the Office of the Privacy
Commissioner,
and there's a number of you there.
Mr. Webster, looking forward to hearing from you.
We've got a reasonable amount of time that's been set
aside
as you gather your team. So, I'll leave it to you to introduce your team.
We've got until 12:45, we'll just see how we go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Can I introduce my colleagues, on my left, Jo
Haywood, who's our general counsel.
On my right, Ewan Lincoln, who's our principal advisor policy.
I also have my manager of policy, Ian Kennedy, with me
today as well.
A number of us are lawyers, some of us aren't.
Very good.
Mr. Chair, members, as you will have seen from my written submission,
I do not support part one of the bill, and I
recommend that it not be passed.
It's not often that I call for a legislative proposal to be
completely rejected, and I do so now because I
have deep concerns about the implications with
part one.
Some context that may be of interest to the committee.
My office has just completed its 2026
privacy survey, and the results suggest that
our fellow Kiwis are increasingly concerned about their right to
privacy and what happens with their personal information,
such as an image captured
by photo or video.
Some results, Mr. Chair. Over half say they have become more
concerned about privacy in recent years.
82%, an extraordinarily high figure, want more
say in how their information is collected and used.
And confidence that New Zealand law adequately protects personal information
is low. Only 18% are extremely
or very confident, while a third have little or no
confidence at all that New Zealand law adequately
protects their personal information.
So, in today's more fractious times, trust and confidence
in important state institutions, like the police,
is a precious thing, and I am concerned that the
proposals in part one of the bill risk undermining
that trust and confidence.
It appears that under this provision, information may be collected simply because
it may, in some unspecified way,
support the police in carrying out its functions and activities.
As an indication of the potential breadth of this authorization,
the regulatory impact statement for the bill refers to collection for
general intelligence purposes in terms of collection for
an unknown or unspecified future policing purpose
and a known or unknown future lawful use.
By providing such a broad authorization for police collection of information,
part one of the bill creates significant privacy risks
that could lead to police collecting and retaining information
about New Zealanders that police have no good reason to
hold.
I believe the bill needs to include an objective, reasonable
threshold for police collection of information.
Mr. Chair, members, no compelling case has been made for police to receive such
wide powers to collect people's information.
My office has asked for examples of specific
scenarios in which police considers that the current legal
settings prevent its officers from effectively performing
their functions, and we have not been provided with any such
examples.
I understand that police want legal certainty, but I don't
believe the bill as drafted provides that certainty.
Because the boundaries of the police's powers are unclear in this bill,
they are likely to be tested in court.
The courts will still be able to determine whether police actions
constitute an unreasonable search in the
circumstances.The broad
authorisation in this bill also means that important protections in the Privacy
Act may not apply. In fact, will not apply.
I do not accept that police should have such a broad discretion to collect,
use, and retain personal information without
reasonable limits being in place.
At the same time, the bill lacks safeguards and provides no certainty to New
Zealanders that their privacy rights will be protected.
I am concerned about how this bill impacts on people's civil and
political rights. For example, it's possible that the
bill could allow police to take video of a group of young people,
say, hanging out in a park, not because they are
connected to a possible crime, a possible investigation,
or a public safety reason, but simply to keep tabs on a group of
people because the video might be useful one day.
I'm not saying that police would necessarily take video in those situations, but I
believe the bill would allow them to do
so, so long as the officers can loosely connect the
photos to a policing function or activity.
And once the photos have been taken, they can be kept, of course, on police's
systems, potentially indefinitely, even though the people in the
photos may have no connection to criminal activity.
On that, I'm also concerned that police has still not addressed the serious
inadequacies in its management and oversight of information
through necessary improvements to its own information management systems,
a problem that they themselves have identified.
As a result, therefore, I have concerns around the storage, the
retention, and destruction, and indeed, the secondary use
of personal information conducted and collected under the powers in
this bill.
In place of part one of this bill, I would like to see a more
careful and a more considered process to develop a
legislative framework for police intelligence gathering.
I believe that such a framework could strike an appropriate balance
between protecting privacy and allowing
police to collect the information it needs.
However, if the bill proceeds, it is essential, I believe, that
it be amended to provide protections for people's privacy
and their rights. I'd like to see the effect of the privacy principles
in the Privacy Act maintained,
other safeguards included in the bill, either through primary or secondary
legislation,
safeguards being subject to independent oversight,
and the commencement date for the bill pushed back to allow safeguards to be put in
place.
Key safeguards should include controls on retention and secondary
use of personal information, requirements for record-keeping,
accountability, and transparency about the exercise of
police powers.
And as I noted in my submission, if I can assist the committee in developing
appropriate safeguards, I would be happy to provide further advice
or to appear before the committee again.
In conclusion, Mr. Chair, members, the police, of course, do have an
important and challenging job to do.
But given their significant coercive powers,
they need to do and be seen to do that job in a way
that protects and respects law-abiding New Zealanders'
rights to privacy, no matter where they are.
Sweeping police powers may inevitably catch some criminals
but are inconsistent with life in a free and
democratic society.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, members.
Right. Thank you very much. We'll go to Ginny
Andersen first.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you for your submission. It was very thorough.
I have two questions. The first is that the Minister of Police has stated
that this legislation simply reinstates the law as it
was before the Tamifuna case. Is that your view?
And if not, why?
I believe that in the case of Tamifuna,
that was a specific response by the Supreme Court to a specific
situation. I don't think that the police has
lost anything from, for example, the work that we did through our IPCA
OPC inquiry into the photograph
of a youth in the Wairarapa or indeed the Tamifuna decision.
Jo, would you like to talk a bit more about Tamifuna?
Yes. Thank you, Michael. Yes, I think the Commissioner's
submission
departs from the police's view that this bill
is simply restoring the law.
Our perspective is that the joint report and Tamifuna were
highlighting the legal constraints applying to police when they are
conducting this activity.
So rather than narrowing the law,
police carry out their powers within a broader
statutory framework. That framework includes the
Policing Act principles, the Search and Surveillance Act,
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act, the Land Transport Act, and the Privacy Act.
So the report by the OPC and the
IPCA and the Supreme Court's decision were
applying the statutory framework to the particular factual
situations, and in Mr. Tamifuna's case, that
involved a traffic stop under the Land Transport Act.
Thank you. Thank you very much. My second question is in relation to your
comments around the storage
and retention of digital images.
We've asked a number of questions about this going forward, and
I was still not reassured that there was sufficient police
IT infrastructure or the requisite
funding to enable the internal systems to be able
to record evidence and hold it in such a way that it would be able to be
checkedThe only answer that we did get was that the new
electronic notebook that police used would be of assistance to be
able to do this. But I still didn't have the reassurance that
there was the sufficient investment into
IT infrastructures to enable some of the checks and balances that
you have outlined in your submission.
Is there anything that you would like to add to that in terms of your awareness
of the capability of police to be able to monitor and
retain and destroy images?
Yes. Thank you for that.
The police certainly have a number of tools to
take digital images. The issue for us, and that's
been brought into sharp relief through the response to our formal
compliance notice under the Privacy Act, in relation to
the
taking of photographs in the Wairarapa, is the ability to
store those in a way that they can be readily retrieved or indeed,
deleted when they're not needed anymore.
We have, through that compliance notice, been seeking to have
all unlawfully taken photographs deleted from police systems,
and that is one area where police have told us, and in fact have said
publicly, that they have been unable to identify those photos due
to inadequacies in their current information management
systems. So yes, there are some significant challenges there.
What we will inevitably see under the proposal set out in the bill
is the taking of photographs of people who have been going about their lawful
everyday business. Those photos are going to end up in a
police system next to people who have been
convicted or accused of some of our most worst crimes.
It's all together in one database.
And the ability for that material to be retrieved, I think, is an open
question, given the current inadequacies in the way the
systems are working at present.
And just one last question, please, Mr. Chair.
Do you think that introducing this legislation is premature,
given that the required IT infrastructure to
do what it is required through privacy is currently not in place?
So, two things. One, I would say if this bill proceeds as
it is, and I would certainly hope that if it was
the view of the government to proceed with this legislation, that they would
consider the natures of the amendments we've proposed.
There would need to be a much greater period set aside before it comes into
force in terms of commencement, to enable police to put in place the
necessary systems, procedures, and infrastructure to enable it to function
effectively. Second, though, my first best
option is that this part of the bill be not commenced with,
and that we start a, as I said, a considered and careful
process with a great degree of public consultation as well, of course,
on the sort of intelligence collection regime
that will be appropriate for a police force going forward in the
modern era with all the digital innovation available to us.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
I've got Todd Stevenson. We've got a number of questions lining up for him.
Thank you. Thank you, Commissioner, and your team for your detailed
submission. Great work. Couple of things I just want to explore.
One is, I would certainly can't speak for the whole committee, but I'd certainly be
interested in your additional safeguards that you
would like to see put in place. I think one of the issues...
And everything you've raised, super important.
I think we,
yeah, there might be some things we can do to this bill, one, to address some of
the issues you have done, and then I really am interested in this idea
around
a framework for police intelligence gathering.
Do you think there's a way we could
strengthen the bill by putting in some safeguards, but then also
noting in, say, regulations that there has to be this
framework that you're talking about?
Could you see some way we could
achieve what you want, but
not ne- well, delay maybe implementation, but at least have
it available to be done in the future?
Sure. Through you, Mr. Chair.
I guess if I think about safeguards, I think about
four areas. First,
tighter thresholds for police collection of information,
needing to assess whether it's necessary to collect the information, whether
the privacy benefits of the collection and proposed use are proportionate
to the expected benefits for policing functions.
So tighter thresholds reflecting the Privacy Act principles there.
Second, controls on the storage, retention and destruction, and
secondary use of that information collected under the powers in the bill.
Third, accountability and transparency provisions, such
as requirements for record keeping, auditing, public recording, and publication
of policies relating to the exercise of the police's powers.
And fourth, of course, oversight of police
compliance with safeguards by an independent body.
One of our concerns, of course, with the provisions as
drafted in part one, is that they displace the Privacy
Act, and therefore the ability of my office to
exercise some prudential oversight of what the police is doing in
this space. In terms of primary
legislation or regulation, I guess first, it would be useful to
have, even if it's at a higher level, such safeguards
specified in legislation, and then with the
ability for, for example, for the responsible minister to
make regulations to provide some more detail.
We would expect that regulations-making power to not be discretionary, that it
would be a requirement of the minister to make those regulations
through the correct process with public consultation, of course.
If I think about other-Agencies that are active
in this space, in the surveillance space.
We have, of course, two security and intelligence agencies which carry
out their intrusive functions within a
very sophisticated and comprehensive
network of statutory provisions and oversight
of what they do.
And one of my concerns, of course, is that in the area of surveillance, we have to,
as a nation, be careful to avoid what I would call surveillance
creep by other state agencies.
We have two agencies who, for special and particular reasons, have
extraordinary surveillance powers, and those are
undertaken within a, as I say, comprehensive
statutory framework to protect the rights and freedoms of New Zealand
citizens.
I would be very wary of similar powers being given to other state
agencies without such a similar set of safeguards being in
place.
All right. Maybe
further to Todd's question, I think it'd be useful if you could supply
some further thoughts on it. Just on the oversight, you also
suggest in your report the appointment
or oversight by the new Inspector General of Police,
and that's one recommendation. Earlier, we heard about the general data
protection regulation that many international countries
adopt. Can you
provide a view on whether we need both?
One, and are you clear that the Inspector General is the
right
organization to do any oversight if we were to impose
something?
Sure. My colleagues might wish to say more on that, but what I would say is
that we have seen developments in other countries
on the other side of the world and closer to home in Australia, where
the oversight bodies that look after, for example,
the intelligence agencies as I've just been talking about, have actually had
their authority extended to cover
the police carrying out such surveillance activities.
But we, of course, have had the proposal to have an Inspector General of Police.
I think at the end of the day, it would come to how the responsibilities,
roles, and powers of that agency are drawn up.
I would see it as a place where there could be a number of oversight
bodies. I would hope that the Office of the Privacy Commissioner would remain
one of those with oversight responsibilities, as well as an Inspector General of
Police. Anything further you want to say on that, Joanne?
I think just to add to that, I think the important
priority is to make sure this bill anticipates
oversight, so that it includes the safeguards that mean that any
oversight body can engage with police
activities.
Unfortunately, the Inspector General of Police has not yet
come to fruition. But if the bill is established in such a way
that anticipates oversight, then you can deal with the choice of
oversight body perhaps further down the track once that Inspector
General comes on
stream.
So you're not specifically proposing Inspector General, but you're
saying that that is one possibility?
Or are you saying when it comes to surveillance, and we've got intelligence, we've
got other activities,
we should be adopting what we have for these
GCIs or SIS type arrangement? Have you got a
clearer view on that?
I guess what, just to clarify for the committee, Mr.
Chair,
what I'm saying is if we went through, for example, a different process than the
one before the committee today, where there was a
considered and careful process to develop a bespoke
standalone legislative framework for police surveillance activities, I would
absolutely see a role for a future Inspector General of Police in
relation to that.
What we'd need to be sure about, though, is that we didn't have a
situation where the police had commenced, for example,
carrying out a new regime of surveillance
activity without that oversight being in place.
Right. Okay. Get the point.
You talked about the objective for holding data
and being very clear about it, and you're saying the bill doesn't.
Section 45 talks about any other lawful purpose.
And so
have you got clear proposals around how you'd tighten that aspect?
Ian, do you want to pitch with this?
We don't have
specific wording, but we do think that there needs to
be a
clear
threshold and justification, a necessity
test, and some sort of
test of proportionality of the collection of information by
police. So at the moment, the power that's in Section 45A,
the other sections that would be introduced by the bill, are very
broad-ranging.
And in particular, we're concerned that the requirement
under the Privacy Act that you need to
determine whether the collection of information is necessary would
effectively be removed by this
bill. So we would like
that kind of threshold to be reintroduced in some way.
Do you think that was intentional to remove that, or do you think that's just
unintentional consequence
in terms of reference to the Privacy Commission?
Well, the
materials relating to this bill do indicate a policy
intent for the Privacy Act to still apply.
Our analysis is that it will be displaced in
some respects. So it is perhaps possible
that it's been a misunderstanding or an unintentional
consequence. But we do think that it would be the legal effect of this
bill that, in particular, that first principle in the Privacy Act,
which is central to the whole act, would be effectively displaced.
Okay, so it would be useful to get your thoughts on that,
around maintaining that
aspect. The one that no one sort of picked up
on, but you do raise in your report, is about police
employees. It's something that we've asked
the officials about, but the understanding around that is where you have a
crime scene and you've got people you might want to bring in
specialists. What's your view on that?
Or did you simply not understand what that term meant?
Yeah, we were simply
asking the question, I guess,
as to whether there was a rationale behind that, because some parts of the Policing
Act,
the powers in those act parts are restricted to constables.
Others are more general to police employees.
So we were just wanting to test whether there was a good rationale, given
that constables have to go through
additional training and requirements in order to
meet the test to become a constable.
So it's good to hear that the committee has asked officials for advice on that
point.
You made the comment about intelligence and intelligence
purpose need to be better defined.
Do you have a clear view around the difference between
intelligence, intelligence purpose and surveillance,
which relates to the act
or, sorry, the bill?
Yes, Mr. Chair. That is why we raised the
question.
A lot could be packed into that word.
The police do have existing guidance
documents that refer to their intelligence function.
And so as part of our discussions prior to the
bill being introduced, we raised the question about the
usefulness of having a definition of intelligence in the bill.
The clearer the bill is, the clearer New Zealanders will be
aware of their rights and privileges in relation to it.
And a lack of a definition in that space does create
more uncertainty, we believe, and
for not just members of the public, but also for police officers in carrying out
their job.
And would you link that to a common definition with what the Secret Service
agencies do, or do you think that police have their own form
of intelligence gathering that's sort of a different
intent? Obviously, you have different purpose.
One is international or different reason for it.
Do you have a view on that?
That would be something that the police would need to work through themselves for
their own purposes, I think, and
work up some proposals for potential legislative
amendment to the bill.
Okay, one more question and then I'll go to Camilla.
We've also heard in submissions earlier today around the need or the,
sorry, the right to have
videos or whatever information that's been collected maybe under surveillance to be
deleted.
There doesn't seem to be any rules. Perhaps it's going to be covered in regulation.
Do you have a view around whether there should be a mandatory requirement, or
you have a right to be able to see what's on file?
Obviously, that then becomes subject to criminals actually trying
to stop stuff being held. But how would you see the balance of
that
right to delete material that isn't relevant
versus the ability of keeping New Zealanders safe?
Well, Mr. Chair, under the current Privacy Act provisions,
everybody has,
through information privacy principle nine, the ability to
ask why information is being retained.
There is a retention provision which says that information shouldn't be kept for
longer than it's needed or there's a reasonable reason to keep it.
I think that one of the challenges with the provisions in
part one is that, as I say, it displaces the effects of the Privacy Act.
It also displaces that principle.
There are good reasons not to retain information you don't need.
One, obviously, the rights of New Zealanders.
Second, the more information you retain, the costlier it is to
keep that information. And third, the more information you hold, as
we've seen with a number of privacy breaches in both the public and private sector,
the more risk there is that that information could be taken in a cyber attack.
So there is strong public policy reasons for having
a retention and erasure principle
being applying to
information collected in this space.
Chair, is there anything more you want to say on rights to erasure in that space?
Just to, yeah, affirm what you're saying, Commissioner, that
the right to deletion and
the principle about accurate and up-to-date information are
important data protection principles.
So while the framework needs to enable police to
retain what it needs to retain, the framework also
needs to have flexibility to discard the
information, particularly under a very broad authorization.
There needs to be an ability to discard the information that police
do not need to retain, so that the
intelligence being retained is useful and fruitful intelligence,
not simply scooping up a lot of information that turns out
not in fact to be particularly useful and is information
about New Zealand citizens and visitors.
Okay, cool. Right. Camilla?
Thank you, and thank you very much for your substantive submission
and for your discussion with the committee.
I just have two questions and just wanting to really understand your
submission to us. The first is, is it your
submission that there needs to be a law change
following the Tamifuna case? And the second question
is,
you've talked about the risk of possible
legal challenges if the law is to proceed as it is
currently outlined in this bill.
Is it your view that-
That there is an increased risk with this legislation, or
that simply it remains unclear because of the lack
of detail which has been traversed a bit already today.
Thank you.
I'll start with the second first, the risk of possible legal challenges.
I think I said in my opening remarks that
you can't
very easily legislate away the power of the court system.
That is the purpose of the court system, after all, to interpret the law in
relation to certain fact situations.
Jo, is there anything more you want to say on that particular point?
I think that our submission
reflects some of the underlying
messages from the joint OPC IPCA
report and the Tamifuna decision,
which is to say that
the bill really only deals with half the problem.
It deals with the point of collection of information by police.
But the messages from the joint report and from
Tamifuna were really saying that you have to consider
intelligence gathering within the full life cycle of the
use of that information and its retention.
And it's in this increasingly intensified
technological progress,
where that information is going into network databases
for analysis and insight, and so on.
So really, the message from the Tamifuna court, and if you think
about what His Honor Justice Koch was saying,
he was really inviting Parliament to create a clear
framework, not just about the authorization for police, but
about retention, use, and destruction of information.
And so
our perspective is that without addressing that side
of the equation, which is useful for the system,
it's useful for police to provide greater certainty.
Without that part of the equation, the safeguards, there's
likely still to be scope for
information gathering to be challenged within the courts, and for the
courts to have a look at that under the privacy
settings which are embedded legally within the Privacy Act, the
Search and Surveillance Act, and the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act.
All right. Hey, we have to bring it to a close.
But thank you for your submission, a weighty submission.
There's obviously Todd asked some specific stuff, and I've
asked for some other stuff. We'd appreciate if you were able to
help the committees do deliberations around those aspects.
So if you could come back to us, that'd be very helpful.
But I want to thank you all for coming through this morning and
giving your thoughts.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, members.
Yes, if there are any further questions, very happy
to respond to them through your advisors to the committee.
And at least we haven't covered everything that was asked by Ms.
Bellich.
Okay. All right, thank you. Now, members, we're going to go into private
session just briefly, if you want to transfer.
Thank you, everyone.